---
layout: post

title: Scraping By
description: A look at the distribution of job postings on Journalismjobs.com

author: Patrick Martin
email: patrick.martin@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: P_R_Martin
---
For anyone about to finish journalism school, finding a job is a pressing concern. Applying data journalism to a job search can provide some insight into the distribution of employment opportunities in this shifting industry. 

I first scraped data from Indeed and Monster, using a search for “journalism” and “reporter.” But the listings from these sites included nursing and trucking jobs.  Any posting with the word “report” appeared in the scraped data. 

I decided to choose a journalism specific job website. I scraped 1,449 job listings from [journalismjobs.com](www.journalismjobs.com) on August 17, 2016. 

675 companies listed jobs on journalismjobs.com. Only 24 of these companies had 10 or more positions listed. 494 of the companies only had one job listed. Texas is the state with the most job listings at 111. The majority of the postings in Texas are for television stations in Amarillo, Austin, El Paso, Harlingen and San Antonio. 

<iframe width="1336.5" height="826.4025000000001" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11aCVlYSCIHFxlAzU-j5HnmGQR2ROq8mLwaXRlTTTswU/pubchart?oid=17022841&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

The city with the most listings is Washington D.C. at 53. Other cities with a large number of postings include New York, Seattle, and Hunt Valley, Maryland. Though it may not seem like a hub for journalism, the unincorporated town north of Baltimore known as Hunt Valley is the home of Sinclair Broadcast Group, which owns 173 television stations in 81 U.S. markets. 

<iframe width="872" height="565" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11aCVlYSCIHFxlAzU-j5HnmGQR2ROq8mLwaXRlTTTswU/pubchart?oid=1950397265&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

Sinclair Broadcast Group is the company with the most job posting, 33, on journalismjobs.com. There are a 45 other jobs associated with the Sinclair Broadcast Group, the highest concentration with 27 of those posted by Seattle Sinclair Interactive.   

<iframe width="2013.54" height="1250.1992400932397" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11aCVlYSCIHFxlAzU-j5HnmGQR2ROq8mLwaXRlTTTswU/pubchart?oid=1555549883&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

