---
layout: post

title: Hydroelectric power in Washington
description: An overview of hydroelectric power generation in Washington State

author: Patrick Martin
email: patrick.martin@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: P_R_Martin
---


## Hydroelectric power in Washington 


The state of Washington leads the nation in Hydroelectric power production. With its 74 water-driven electric plants, the state produced 30 percent of the nation’s hydroelectric power in 2014, according to the Energy Information Administration. Just over three-quarters (77 percent) of all electricity produced in Washington is from hydroelectric dams. Some of this power, especially in summer months, is exported to [southern California](http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.cfm?id=16891). 

The prominence of hydroelectric power in Washington is rooted in the numerous dam projects completed decades ago. “The Depression of the 1930's, coupled with widespread floods and drought in the West, spurred the building of great multipurpose Reclamation projects such as Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River,” the Bureau of Reclamation stated in a [history of hydropower](http://www.usbr.gov/power/edu/history.html). 

<iframe width="1330" height="474" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15wiWigY51yHcj6vAp93RRNtcO2KAPjL4i-0ow1XFt38/pubchart?oid=1705718418&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

Grant County has the largest generating capacity of any county in the state. The Grand Coulee Dam and the Chief Joseph dam are the biggest and second biggest hydroelectric plants in terms of generation capacity in the state, and they are both located in Grant County. Both have 27 generators. Combined they provide 43 percent of all nameplate generating capacity in the state (Grand Coulee 31%--6495 Megawatts; Chief Joseph 12%--2456 Megawatts). Since water levels behind dams vary from summer to winter, the actual generation capacity may vary from the nameplate capacity for certain power plants. 

<iframe width="768" height="516" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15wiWigY51yHcj6vAp93RRNtcO2KAPjL4i-0ow1XFt38/pubchart?oid=1186579027&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

The median nameplate capacity of generators across the state is 51.3 Megawatts, which is enough to power 41,000 homes. Generating plant  The median year of initial operation for hydroelectric generators across Washington is 1960, a bit younger than the national median age of 1951. The oldest operational generators still use are four units, which were first used in 1898. They are in the Snoqualmie plant operated by Puget Sound Energy in King County. There are 23 operational generators in Washington that are over 100 years old. The most recent generator to come online was one in the McNary Fish plant in 1997. It is operated by Northern Wasco County Public Utility District in Benton County. 

Major technology companies have taken advantage of the cheap and reliable electricity in Washington by establishing large server farms in Grant county. Server farms are large warehouse full of computer banks, which support cloud computing services. Since these masses of computing power consume large amounts of electricity, utility rates are a major factor in determining their location. The average rate for industrial use across the U.S. is 6.39 cents per kilowatt-hour, while the average rate for industry in Washington state is 4.41 cents per kilowatt-hour.  Dell, Intuit, Microsoft, Sabey, Server Farm Realty, Vantage, and Yahoo! have large server farms Grant County. The average cost of electricity there is 2.88 cents per kilowatt-hour for industrial customers, according to the [Grant County Economic Development council](http://www.grantedc.com/grant-county-key-industries/data-centers).

<iframe width="716" height="371" seamless frameborder="0" scrolling="no" src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15wiWigY51yHcj6vAp93RRNtcO2KAPjL4i-0ow1XFt38/pubchart?oid=98636544&amp;format=interactive"></iframe>

Newer legislation also encourages hydroelectric power. According to the [Institute for Energy Research](http://instituteforenergyresearch.org/media/state-regs/pdf/Washington.pdf), “The state’s renewable portfolio standard mandates that utilities that serve more than 25,000 customers generate 15 percent of electricity from renewables by 2020.” The renewability, reliability and low cost of hydroelectric power will likely make it a major part of Washington’s energy supply in the future. 


