---
layout: post

title: Good and Bad Visual Journalism 
description: A comparison of two pieces of visual journalism from the New York Times 

author: Patrick Martin
email: patrick.martin@u.northwestern.edu
twitter: P_R_Martin
---
Example of poor visual journalism: [The Ebb and Flow of Movies: Box Office Receipts 1986 — 2008, The New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2008/02/23/movies/20080223_REVENUE_GRAPHIC.html?_r=0)

This semi-interactive graphic attempts to depict the relative success of different movies. The graphic is overwhelming in the amount of data represented, and it’s lack of understandable scale is confusing. Weekly box office revenue, total domestic gross revenue and an undefined term “longevity,” is represented for probably hundreds of movies over a 22-year period. There is no vertical axis label to give the reader a sense of scale for the weekly revenue.  The blobs for each movie are stacked on top of each other in a wide variety of shapes, making relative comparison nearly impossible. Lumps depicting spikes of movie revenue protrude above and below the horizontal time axis with no apparent meaning. The total gross revenue is shown by the area and color of each movie-blob, adding to the confusion. The largest revenue lumps are in the summer and the holiday period, which qualitatively supports part of the statement in the text above the graph. The second argument in the text, that movies with strong Oscar potential build audiences slowly, is not supported. There is no distinction made for Oscar nominees or winners anywhere in the graph. Even if there was an associated story, a graph should be comprehensible on its own.  A far better graph would have directly compared the sales performance of a few Oscar winning films and a few box office hits. This would make it much easier to see the difference between the two types of movies over time. 

Example of good visual journalism: [It’s All Connected: A Spectator’s Guide to the Euro Crisis, The New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com/imagepages/2011/10/22/opinion/20111023_DATAPOINTS.html?ref=sunday-review)

This graph takes a complex subject, the European financial crisis, and makes it comprehensible. The text circling the central graph explains how the crisis started, possible outcomes, and how this could impact the American financial system. The size and color of each graph element clearly relates to the story, and these visual elements give the reader a sense of each country’s debt burden and net level of indebtedness between countries. There are quite a few arrows crossing all over the chart, but the nodes are spread out enough that this portrays interconnectivity without overwhelming the reader.  The creator chose to show the “imbalance of debt exposure between countries” with the arrows. While France and Italy owe each other money, only the net difference is shown. Depicting every debt flow would have doubld the number of arrows on the chart, and this would have been overwhelming. The color coding of risk is rather vague. Limiting the nodes to four colors makes relative comparison easy, but I would still like to see the methodology for determining what makes Greece’s debt situation “more worrisome” than that of France or Spain. I find it interesting that the smallest nodes on the graph are the ones most at risk of default, and I don’t think I would have realized that fact without this graphic. 

